entrevista con la señorita, ¿cómo se llama?
Gabriela Gámez. Gabriela Gámez. ¿Y dónde nació
usted? Yo nací en, era como, aquí dicen un rancho
muy grande, y allá le nombran Hacienda de México.
Yo nací en la Hacienda de Dolores. ¿En qué estado?
Tamaulipas. Sí. Estado de Tamaulipas. y me
bautizaron en Padilla.
Bueno, díganme más sobre esta hacienda de
Dolores. Bueno, yo nací allí. Yo nomás nací allí en
la hacienda de Dolores porque allí trabajaba mi
padre y recibían ellos. Era, pues, como verigrace
aquí un rancho que hay muchos There were a lot of
people to work with. But the little town where they
went was called Padilla, Tamaulipas. And now it's
a big town. The town is called what? Padilla,
Tamaulipas. And it was close to what? Ciudad
Victoria. It's the capital of Padilla and the
neighboring towns, like here. Like Austin and all
these towns in the capital of Texas. The capital of
Tamaulipas. And was the Delores farm very big? My
father told me that it was. There were many
workers. And what kind of crops did they have? They
were all farmers, workers. seeders of corn,
because it was what they sowed in Mexico. Corn,
beans, cane to make the sweet, the sweet. My father
worked in that, it was called the molienda, where
they ground all the cane to get the sweetness out of
the cane, to make the sweet and make the sweet. As
they make molasses here, there is one, and there
they made the sweet, they made it and then they Yes,
he is a work specialist. And your mother too? No, my
mother didn't work. My mother only worked at home.
My mother would look after us, make my father's
food, wash, iron. How many children were there?
When we were there, there were only three of us. Me,
my older sister who lives in Corpus, Mrs.
Martinez, and me. and my brother, who died four
years ago. And these other three were born here in
the United States. Juan, my brother, Maria, my
brother, and Manuel, my brother, the youngest in
the family. I lived here in the colony. And in this
farm, how many years did you have? Well, when we
moved here, Where my father went, it was called the
Rosario Farm. Yes. Also a farm with a lot of
agriculture. Yes. Well, that's where my father
spent a lot of time, and that's where my father
moved here, to the United States. What year?
August 14, 1916. 16. He moved here, to the United
States. And since then, he has never returned to
Mexico. No? No. Why not? Well... Later on, he
needed a lot of permission. He didn't know how to
read, my father, but he was a very correct man with
all people. He didn't want to say that he wanted to
violate the law of the United States. That's why he
never went back to Mexico. He said that his mother
and sisters had already finished. And if I have my
family here, why would I go? That's why she was
never there for me. And you, no? No, I went to see
Matamoros. I only know Matamoros. Yes. Because I
had some relatives, an aunt. No, not her, not her
daughters. And they came with us when my father
died. After my father died, at the age of two, my
aunt, my father's little sister, died. And my
brother, Manuel. I had vacations, so they wanted
us to go. And we went so that I could stay there for a
few weeks, so that I wouldn't forget a little.
Because my parents both died the same week. And
your family never wants to live in Mexico again?
Well, no, because they are from here, my brothers.
Oh, yes, your brothers are from here. And my
parents died. I'm Mexican, but what am I going to do
there? I have my siblings. I have my papers. I have
my passport. My parents fixed my passport. Jose
fixed his, because he lost his passport. He went to
immigration. They asked him why he didn't give me
his passport. He said, I'm going to tell you the
truth. He said, I don't know how to read or write.
You didn't? No. You didn't go to school? No,
because when we were little, we lived in a ranch
called Casamorada. It was close to Canara, but
there were seven days to come on foot. My father
said it was very hard for us to come on foot, except
for the two of us, me and my sister. And this one was
here, right? Yes. How old were you when you left
Mexico? I was six, I think. I was born in 1910 and we
passed on in 1916. I was about six years old, but I
was five and a half years old. And your older sister
went to school in Mexico? No. Are there schools in
this estate? Yes, there were, but my parents came
here. Yes.
No, it wasn't school yet, because in Mexico, my
mother and I, some of them were older, others
younger, like that. Yes. That's why we didn't have
a school. None of my brothers had a school. No? No.
Your brothers, no? No. Those who were born here?
No, because they were the ones who lived in Calale.
In the ranch. In the ranch. And it was very far. The
school was here, in Calale. How many miles is the
school? Well, there was... I think there's about
six or seven miles from Calale to that ranch. We had
to walk. And there were no buses or anything? No,
there were before. In 19...
I was 23, 24. 23, yes. There was no... That's why
many people said, well, now the children don't go
to school. Because they don't want to, because
there are voices for them to go, right? Yes. So, no.
My father said, well, I don't send my girls to
school because they are very far away. They are
girls, women. Well, there were my boys, well, two,
who were my brother and sister. The other one was
younger, he was in high school, I think, Juan. But
then they treated them very badly, the other boys
from school, they treated them very badly. And my
dad said, well, one day they're going to hit them,
they're going to break their foot or something.
And it's very far, so when I go, I'm going to bring
them. And he lived working, because all the time he
was a farmer, my dad. Yes. He worked all the time at
the ranch as a farmer. But is this work in the farm
more important or not? In Mexico, yes. Well, it was
their work. There were a lot of workers, my mother
said. The work was purely to make canals, you know?
Yes. To water the work. Yes. With pure shovel. Yes.
Do you know what a shovel is? To build. There wasn't
like here, where they did it with machines and
everything. Yes. In those years that my father
lived, he was young, he only had my sister and me. We
were three in the family. Yes. We were six in the
family. Well, for what reason did you come here to
the United States? Well, they came when, you
remember, here also in some I don't know, years
ago. A lot of people also went to Mexico because
there was going to be a lot of war here in the United
States, right? Yes. Well, then, in Mexico there
was also a lot of war and a lot of people came here
because the war was very hard there. Tell me about
this war. Well, I don't know, but my mom says that
that's why they came from there, from where they
lived, from where they lived. Yes. Because there
was a lot of war. Like there is now in Vietnam. So
many people who run from other towns to mountains,
to mountains, to hide. And in Mexico, I think they
were born like that too. And a lot of people came
because they were not going to kill their
children. They were civilians, they were not
soldiers in the war. And many soldiers came and
entered a town. Yes. And for that reason, many
people, many families came to see my mother. Well,
I don't know, my mother talked to us and my father
didn't. Yes, yes. Well, it was very dangerous.
Well, I think so. And many, many people were
killed. Who knows, I think, I don't know. My mother
says that's why they came here. First they went to
Hacienda
del Rosario, on the other side of the river.
Hacienda del Rosario, it's closer to the river.
Yes,
it's close to Matamoros, over there. Yes. From
Matamoros to here. And less war there? No, no, no,
no. In this hacienda, Rosario. Ah, no, no. There
was no peaceful like here. Ah, it was more peaceful
in these years. Yes. But Hacienda de Dolores was
not peaceful. Well, no, because they came
suddenly like in Vietnam, so peaceful, and
suddenly they began to fight, you know? Yes. The
war. Well, that's how it was in Mexico in those
years. Yes. That's why many people came here. Many
families. They came from this town to here. Other
towns also came. Yes. And then my mother and I
stayed at the Rosario farm. And then my father went
to work here. And until I say that it was very hard
for her to be there with us and him here. Maybe he
tried to find a way to get by. And then they didn't
pay anything, just a nickel and they passed. Here?
Yes. Ah, just a nickel? Para pasar entonces. Ah,
para pasar. Sí, para pasar el río, you know. Sí.
Como ahora usted va para México, pues pasa por el
puente. Pero la chequean el pasaporte, los
papeles y todo. Entonces, no, nomás le pagaba un
nikle o un daimel por, según la familia que
tuviera, y se la pasaba. Ah, ¿en qué pueblo pasaba?
En,
yo creo que es en Toluca, Toluca. On the side of
Mercedes. Toluca, Tamaulipas? No, Toluca,
Texas. Toluca, Texas? Ah, yes. I think it's in the
middle of Mercedes and Tona. I don't know. I don't
know. I don't know those towns. I don't know much.
Because when I was older, we came to Roestán with an
aunt of mine. With my aunt, a sister of my father.
And I came with her. With her? With your aunt? Yes.
And another little sister, the one who didn't die.
A little sister who was born in the Rosary and my mom
brought her a baby when she came. But she died here
when she was 12 years old. Oh, how sad. Yes,
because, how do you say it? We were working,
working, and she was 12 years old. In that, we went
like this, and I said, Papa, go for a walk, so we can
go back to work. And they put on some long linen
dresses for the pizca. Yes. Very curious. And she
was putting them on, and a cart was coming. So the
auntie said, come on, little girl, get out of the
cart. And she got very scared. She got very scared.
Making me be scared, you know? Very nervous. Yes. Y
ella dijo el doctor, cuando mi papá la llevó con el
doctor, mi mamá, que ella estaba, ¿cómo? Cuando es
girl at 20 years old is making, para ser una girl,
you know? Paseo a mujer. Sí, bueno. Ella estaba, el
doctor dijo que ella estaba para hacerse así, una
señorita. Sí. Y ella se asustó mucho y todo su blood
se stopped, you know? Se stopped, you know, coming
in. Blood? Uh-huh. Her blood didn't go down
anymore. And that's why she died very soon. How
sad. Yes. Her mother died three weeks later. And
she was very sad. She didn't talk and she didn't
feel bad. No tenía fiebre, no tenía nada. No
tuviste. No tuviste. Y no. Stop. Porque dijo el
doctor que se veía todas las... Estas big venas,
you know? Estas. Sí. Se... Stop. No caminaron con
el big susto. Y ella estaba para hacerse una picro,
una señorita. Sí. Se stop. Con el big susto del
carro. Porque venía el hombro muy grueso y ella
venía así. She
didn't say anything, no talk, no nothing. She was
very scared and then she started talking, but she
said she was very scared. Are there doctors to
assist her? Yes, doctors cured her and
everything, but all the doctors said it was the
same. Because she was very young, she was 12 years
old, 13. She was going to get a surgery. a lady, and
she said, that's very bad, that's a very bad scare,
when they are going to start to do a bichloro,
that's a very bad
scare. And she died in this ranch? No, she died here
by the Hawaii Nile, but then there was no Hawaii
Nile, there was a little ranch, and there we lived
with A lady who was a teacher, her name was Maria
McEnbride. My father used to work with her. We
lived there and she got sick. She died. Yes. She had
many years of death. Yes. She was very young when
she died. I was the only one left. My older sister, I
have an older sister in the family, she has bodies.
She lives in bodies. And then... Me and my brother,
who died. And then Juan. This is the one from here,
from the United States, who was born. Juan and
Maria and Manuel. Two men and a woman from here. And
from Mexico, two men, no, two women and a man. And a
man, yes. There were six families. Well, and what
kind of work did your brother Juan have? Juan Gomez
Jr., the one who lived here? Or the big one? The one
who died? Yes. All his life, from the age of 17, he
started working in a junkyard. Do you know what a
junkyard is? Where they make cars and... Oh, a
place... Yes, to make cars, to cut cars. A person
comes and wants a part of a car, for example, and
they cut it. That's what he worked on. From the age
of 17, he started working. Yes. Until he died.
After his work, on Saturday, he arrived at his work
and told his wife. He said, I'm going to take a bath,
and there's your clothes. He took his bath,
dressed, and said, I said, first of all, I'm going
to pay the bills for the electricity bill. And he
said, you know what you do, right? I said, yes. He
said, I'll be back in a little while. And he left.
And when he came back, he didn't come back. Because
when he came back, a friend who worked together in
the same place, he said, where are you going?
Gámez. He said, I'm going to pay my bills. He said,
I'm going there too. I said, come, I have a ride. He
said, well. They went and paid the bills, and on the
way back, a big truck, a garbage
truck. And he killed himself. He left... With the
garbage truck? The big truck hit them on their
furniture.
Two were killed, my brother and another. Another
man, and the driver had like... Six months, like
four months in the hospital, because he just broke
down from here. But my brother died later. The
other man came to the hospital, he lasted 15
minutes, alive. My brother was taken out of the
hospital.
Very sad. Yes, very sad. And he left the family. 11
children. He had 11 children. And his wife, what is
possible for her with so many children? Yes,
but... She had the oldest, he was already in
Vietnam in the war. The oldest. The oldest. Yes. He
was 18 years old and he was in Vietnam. Is he in
Vietnam now? No, they already completed it. Ah,
yes. They completed it. And does he help his mother
with us? Well, yes, the children are all grown up
and almost all of them are married. He only has two
children left in the house and two children. The
others are all married, but he is the only one left.
And did she have a job? No, she never worked. Never?
She was at home with the children and my brother. He
said he didn't need to go to work because he worked.
Yes. No, you need to go to work. I work for you, for my
children. Yes. All the time, I work, I work, all the
time. Because my father didn't teach them, he
said, no, I didn't teach my children school, but I
taught them to work and to respect people. Yes.
Especially a great man of age, to respect him. Yes.
Because when my father and mother died, they were
already married. They had a family. Not a big one,
but a small one. And they didn't smoke in front of my
father. No? No. They did smoke. He knew they
smoked, but in front of him, when they sat down to
talk, and many people, now many children, their
father was sitting and drinking, saying, they
were drinking beer, right? Yes. They didn't smoke
in front of him, because they respected his
father. My father, well, he didn't teach them how
to smoke, but he taught them how to behave well with
older people, and he would say, in front of an older
person, don't smoke, don't ask for firewood to
light a cigarette, or anything like that. If they
wanted to smoke, Ustedes carguen sus mechas o
vayan a buscar lumbre en otra parte. Pero nunca le
pidan a un señor grande de edad, a una persona más
grande que ustedes. Porque no es correcto. Es
falta de educación. Sí. Y su papá estaba muy
correcto. Sí. De todos. Sí. En trabajo,
en dirigir sus hijos. Cuando ya se casaron, les
dijo, el que se casó primero fue Juan. Después del
más chiquito, que fue Meme. Dijo, usted ya se le
acabó de andar en la calle a las 11. Ya para las 8
puede ir a tomarse una cerveza con sus amigos, a
platicar un ratito. No se le quita nada, pero como
Dios manda y correctamente. Pero ya para las 9
tiene que estar en su casa, porque su obligación
aquí la tiene. You have your wife, you have your
children. You are no longer on the street. The
street is for those who have not been married. You
can talk to your friends. You can talk to your
friends, but in other places you shouldn't do
that. The street is over for you. Yes. And they were
like that. They were like, as my father would say,
they were like that. Well, where did your father
come from? My father was from He was born in
Sotolamarina. Sotolamarina. Yes, I know. She was
born there and she got baptized. But he got married
here in Hacienda Dolores in Tamaulipas. Here in
Padilla with my mother. Your mother was from
Hacienda? My mother was a native of Tamaulipas.
She was born in Padilla and she got married with my
father. My father was born in Sotolamarina. When
my grandmother
became a widow because her father died, my father
came to Padilla when he was 12 years old with his
mother and other sisters. Y ahí se hizo hombre. Ahí
se enseñó a trabajar. Y ahí se hizo hombre él. Y ahí
se casó con mi mamá. Sí. Con mi mamá. ¿Cómo se llama
su papá? Juan Gámez. Juan Cruz Gámez. Juan Gámez de
la Cruz. Juan Gámez. No Gómez. Gámez. Gámez.
Diferente. Sí. Hay Gómez y nosotros hemos Gámez.
Gámez. Gámez. Es un nombre y poco diferente. Sí.
Gámez. Gámez. Como esto. Gámez.
Juan Gámez, the lord of the cross. He was born on the
3rd of May, the day of the Holy Cross. He is the one
who has the name of the Cross.
In what year was your father born? I don't know. I do
know, but I don't remember. When they died, there
are the names on the stone. The year they were born.
The year they died. They now have...
They completed 16 years of death. Sixteen. Since
he died? Since he died. Yes. That's where they
died, where I live. In San Juan Addition, in the
colony. That's where they died. In San Juan?
Addition, here. The colony of Corpus Christi?
Yes, here, one of mine from here. Ah, yes. And when
he was your age, what kind of work did your father
have? Well, he worked here with this lady. Mr. Hugh
Weiss worked here for a long time. Yes. We lived
here. From here we came back to the suburb, to the
colony we lived in. Yes. I worked with the
gentlemen. Well, just as I worked with the
gentlemen, I made the pipes and worked, because
before I had no job, I worked as a laborer. What year
did you come here? In 1900, here with this ranch?
Yes. We came in November of 1938.
And how old were you? About 18 or 19 years old. I
worked with them for 20 years. And then they said
they were going on vacation. They left. And then I
went to my house. I worked from 1938 to 1958. Yes.
And then I went. And then I worked with other
Americans in bodies. Yes. And from there I worked
for a long time with another lady, but then she got
married. She was a widow and she got married. And
then I came and she got married. One day Rusty
Blount told me that he was going to work with him one
day. He said he didn't have a job. I said no, because
the boss got married. She told Carola that I wasn't
working. Mejor hablar. Yo tengo un año de estar
trabajando para atrás. ¿Y para cuantos años
estaba aquí ahora? Tengo un año ahora. Nueve años
aquí. No, un año. Ahorita para atrás, de vuelta,
tengo un año. Ah, de vuelta, un año. Pero
trabajé... Twenty years with them. In these
years, they married. Yes. Twenty years. I was more
middle-aged, more young. Yes. And you never
married? No. No? Why not? Well, I don't know,
because I was... My brothers got married. My
brother, Juan, got married first. And then Pedro,
my brother, who died. Yes. He was the oldest, but he
got married later. And then... My sister,
Mariela, also lives in Alma, Colombia. And I
stayed because I always... How do you say it? I was
always very... very... How do you say it? Very
content with my father and mother. Yes, yes.
Because I worked all the time. I used to work all the
time and the lady used to pay me and give me my check
or money. I used to take it to my dad. Yes. I used to
bring it to my dad. My dad used to say, that's my boy
who keeps us. Yes. When he got married, he used to
say, that's my boy who keeps us because the boys got
married. And when I don't work, he keeps us. Yes.
And that's why I never got married. Because, I
don't know, I always wanted to be with my mom. with
my mom. Yes, it's a lot of responsibility to your
parents. And I was always there for them. And then
they died and I was left alone. Yes. And then I felt
very sad because my mom died, my dad first, and then
my mom. I stayed with an aunt, excuse me, alone. And
then she died. Yes. Two years after my mother and
father died, he died. Yes. And then I was left
alone. Then my younger brother, who lived here,
moved there too. Then I had a house and sold it. I
made that little one where I live. Yes. I live
alone, but as an example, Well, this house is my
brother Juan's house. I have respect for him. I
know my sister lives there. I live in my little
house. Does your brother live here too? Yes, he
lives in San Juan. The other one lived there, but he
moved there. We all lived there when my father
died. Is San Juan very close? One is mine here. One
is mine here. Ah, it's very close. Yes. And your
family was here? Yes. When my father died and my
mother, they were all there. Not together, but
everyone in their
house. Yes.
Well, tell me about your trip to Hacienda de
Dolores. to this other hacienda, the trip? I don't
know because I don't remember. But what did your
mother say about these things? No, my mother says
that they came from there. It was my father because
he came first to this hacienda. And he wrote to her
and sent her money for food for us. So he wrote to her
and told her to get ready because he was going to go I
asked him how many days he was going. He said, are
you ready? I said, are the girls ready? Are you
ready? Well, you can bring clothes for them and for
you. Yes. And then my father went and brought her
there. Yes. To the Hacienda de Dolores. Yes. And
his families stayed there. Yes. So my mother had
her mother and my grandmother. Yes. But my
father's mother had already passed away. Yes. In
what way? In Bahia? I don't remember. I don't know.
They didn't tell me. I think I was in Guayin because
they were in Guayin. Guayin. What is a Guayin? With
mules. Oh, with mules! But they are called
Guayines. Guayines, with mules. And is it a very
long trip? I don't know. I think it is because it is a
little far. From Tamaulipas to... It's a little
far. Yes. But now, by car, it's not very far. I think
it's less than a day away. Yes, but in Guayí, it's
quite far. I don't know where it is, but maybe in
Guayí, because it was what I saw before. There were
no cars. No, not these days. Is there enough to eat
on this trip? Yes, I think so, my father had it.
Well, he worked. Yes. And then he sowed, he had,
well, how do you say, half, they gave me. Well, the
boss gave him certain acres of land, my father
cultivated them. Ajá. They sowed what they had to
sow, what they picked up from the harvest, half for
him and half for the boss. Yes, I understand. And
what kind of houses did you have? Well, my mom used
to say they were adobe houses. Adobe? Yes, adobe
houses. My mom made some pictures like this, a
little bigger. Yes. They used to beat the cement
here, you know? Yes. But over there they beat it
with dirt, with water. They made them and then they
made the house out of pure adobe. And the floor was
made of adobe. Yes. And the roof was made of straw,
my mom says.
Yes. Straw is like... There's a very big roof,
right? Yes. And the... They put the ceilings, but
the houses don't get wet. First they put only
sticks like this. Yes. And you see how they make
houses over there in the overseas,
the Japanese and all that. Yes, and also in Mexico.
Well, and they put only sticks like this, and then
there they put only zakate, but well composed,
well settled. Yes. And the houses don't get wet.
They all had good houses, big ones for families.
In this farm, for all the families, there were good
houses? Yes, good houses. And the owner paid a lot?
Yes, he paid them. I don't know how much he would
earn in Mexico, I don't know, because then they
paid a little. But as it was the farm, and he was a
farmer, well, that was fine. For example, from
what they sowed, they took out half, half for the
landowner and half for the miller, for the worker.
And the corn, my mother says that they soaked it in
the mafrota, then they took it out and put it in
bags, in bags. And then they came to buy it, they
sold it, because it was pure money they had, and
beans and all that. Life was good in the days before
the war. Yes. And then when we were here in Kuala
Lumpur, we never... Well,
they didn't pay much, so my father would plant a
little cotton and all that. But my father was
always a man who planted. Mi mamá tenía muchas
gallinas. ¿Sí? Muchas gallinas. ¿Aquí en qué? Sí,
en Calale, en el rancho. En el otro rancho. En el
rancho donde nació mi hermanito de chico. ¿Cómo se
llama este rancho? Le decían Casa Morada. ¿Casa?
Morada. Morada. ¿Y está cerca de aquí o no? Bueno,
yo no sé cuántas meses hay aquí. Eso está al otro
lado de Calale, el rancho ese. ¿El otro lado de?
Calale. Calale. McAllen? No, Cal Allen. This
town. Oh, Cal Allen. Yes. And was it a big ranch or
small? No, they were two ranches, that gentleman.
What was the gentleman's name? That gentleman's
name was Mr. Sice. Ed Sice. Eduardo Sice. He lived
here in Corpus Christi. Yes. That gentleman. And
they lived with us and all the time they would say,
and go. The Lord said to them. My father sowed
cabbage. Yes. The time it was cabbage, he would sow
cabbage and also with him, with the lords. Yes. And
the priests would say to him, Juan, I want your
children to go tomorrow. to cut the grass from the
cabbage. I went to see him and the grass was coming
out. He said, I want it to be very clean. I think that
next week the buyer will come to treat him. How much
does the cabbage lacquer cost? He said, because
his children are very good at working. And they
were me, Pedro my brother, and Juan my brother. The
three of us. We were riding horses. Curioso. Pero
la vida, además, antes era muy bonita. Estaba muy
bonito en aquella rancho. Sí. Y yo digo que era muy
bonita la vida de antes. Los muchachos eran muy
simples, todos. Los de ahora no, ¿verdad? Los
muchachos son muy... Vimos en ron, y nomás tomando
cerveza, y ron, y los carros corriendo. Sí. Y antes
no. Trabajaban. They would go to work and give them
to their parents. My father would go to work for us.
He would come and tell us, they are going to cut this
grass, this mud, they are not going to make mud.
They cut the grass well, very well cut. And later I
would come and give them a ride. And he would take us
food to work. Because he was retired to the other
ranch where we lived. So that we wouldn't go until
the afternoon. And he would take us food. and he was
going to see the work that was not there. He would go
back to work and later the boss would come and say,
Oh Juan, your children are very good at working,
the best children there are. Then one day Juan
would say to the children, they were the middle
ones, but he would say that the children of Juan
were very good at working in the salon. The other
one worked cleaning ...chicken, corn... ...they
cut the grass... ...we sowed... ...with a small
plow, with a mule... ...my brother... ...had four
mules... ...with a disc... ...and then we...
...we sowed with another mule... ...and a small
mule... I worked all the time with the family. And
in this ranch, did your father also have land for
food, for the family? To plant? Yes. Oh, yes. Yes?
We, my father, all the time, we never went hungry.
Many people say that they lived very limited and
that we didn't. We all the time, my father, I had a
lot of animals, a lot of chickens. Your father?
Yes, marranos that we raised. And I sold them to my
mother. I would put a lot of chickens and my mother
would gather a lot of blanquillos and my father
would take them to the village of Robestán to sell.
And from there, with almost all the blanquillos,
he brought the most necessary. Yes. Because we
had... There was sugar, coffee, butter, what we
needed, beans. Not beans because we planted them
and we always had them. But the rest that we needed
for the house, coffee, sugar. We never had, we
never got hungry. We always had a lot to eat. That's
nice. And in medicine, there are plants for
medicine too? Yes, there are medicinal plants for
the stomach. My mom always planted them. It had
grass, it had a little bush that was very good when
it hurts, it's called stafiate. Stafiate, yes. It
was rough, because it also has a very unpleasant
aroma, but it's very good with a colic that it has.
Yes. And that was my brother Juan. It had rained a
lot and my mother used to water cows because the
boss told my father, Juan, he said, all the cows
that have babies, he said, you can throw the babies
into the corral and you can water the cows, so they
are taught to water them and that the babies grow
well, they are not going to die alone in the pasture
because they are very small. My father washed
them. And my mom would order the cows and she would
make cheese. Yes, cheese. White cheese. My mom
made a lot. Yes. And in the afternoon it had rained a
lot and my mom would go to the corral to put all the
sheep here in the corral where they were locked up
and the cows over there and they would put them,
they already had the food there that my dad had,
corn straws, to put them so that they would sleep
all night. And this, how much vaccine did they give
me? I was going to play, but my mom said, don't go
because there are a lot of thorns with the rain and
you can sprain your foot. She said, no, I'm not
going to play, the water is running. And I think in
the trunk, there was a mosquito and it didn't turn
around. I think there was a viper and it bit a viper.
Yes, my brother. He bit it here. Then he ran and
said, Mom, a little animal bit me with its tail. I
said, Mom, how? What animal? He said, yes, and it's
asleep. He came to my mom, he came to my mom with a
bucket of milk, and he left her at home. He said,
don't worry, don't worry. He said, when? He said,
he bit a little animal with its tail, and it brought
a drop of blood. He said, yes, there was a viper. And
then my father's boss...
My father went and told him, and then the father
came and said, let me go and bring the doctor to
Rodescán. Then the doctors went out to the ranch,
and he was very drunk, and the doctor came and
brought him. And he was lying down, and he had his
stomach like this, it got very big, the stomach,
because of the poison of the diva. But he didn't cry
and the doctor gave him panchovia. He said it was
like panchovia. And he just gave him a little glass
of water. He gave him a little powder that he had to
repeat. He said, don't be afraid. He said, the
child is not going to do anything. He just said,
he's going to put a lot of gas and with pure lamp oil.
Yes. He put it in his hands, he put it in his foot.